---
title: 'Autonomous Snow Removal Robot'
date: '2020-01-02'
description: 'The Autonomous Snow Removal Robot (AnSRR) was senior design project  by Team Snowzone at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) during the academic year 2019-2020.'
---
## Overview
 This ambitious project was led by a team of four senior electrical engineering majors, who were dedicated to creating a custom robotic system using the Robot Operating System (ROS).

The AnSRR will be designed with a range of advanced features to improve its efficiency and performance. These will include path planning, which will enable the robot to navigate to specific areas and clear snow in an organized and efficient manner. The robot will also be equipped with obstacle avoidance sensors, which will help it to detect and avoid any obstacles in its path, ensuring safe and reliable operation.

Powering the AnSRR will be a lithium-based battery, which will ensure long-lasting performance and efficiency. The robot will also be rated at least IP54 for waterproof and dustproof protection, and it will have the ability to maintain optimal internal temperature at all times to ensure proper functioning of electronics. The robot will have a compact design of 18x18x18 inches.

Overall, the AnSRR is a highly ambitious and innovative project, and the team is putting in a lot of hard work and dedication to bring it to life. I am excited to be a part of the team and it will be a great learning experience for me.

## Project Goals
- Affordable
- Smart and Autonomous
- Proof of Concept

## Engineering Requirements
- Provide user access to control features such as start and stop.
- Clear an area of 400 sqft with 7 inches of snow in height within 30 minutes.
- Use a lithium-based battery for efficient and long-lasting performance.
- Equip with LED indicators to increase visibility to bystanders during operation.
- Incorporate obstacle detection and avoidance sensors for improved safety during operation.
- Rated at least IP54 for waterproof and dustproof protection.
- Maintain optimal internal temperature at all times to ensure proper functioning of electronics.
- Have a competitive price point of around $2000 for the base model.
- Keep annual maintenance cost for the user to a maximum of $110.
- Have a compact design with dimensions of 18 inches in length, 18 inches in width, and 18 inches in height.

## Design Ideas
### Alternative 1
 - Magnetic Strips
 - Ultrasound Sensors
 - One Stage Snowblower
 - Tires
### Alternative 2
 - LiDAR
 - Ultrasound Sensors
 - One Stage Snowblower
 - Tires
 ### Alternative 3
 - Beacons
 - LiDAR
 - Two Stage Snowblower
 - Treads