---
title: 'Students Choice Project'
date: '2020-01-01'
description: 'A critic on the VR-Based FPS survival game Into the Radius for the CS 428 Students Choice Project A critic on the VR-Based FPS survival game Into the Radius for the CS 428 Students Choice Project'
---

# INTO THE RADIUS

## A Single-Player Survival Shooter Game for VR. 
The player is spawned in a **dystopian environment** known as the Pechorsk Anomaly Zone with mysterious artifacts and entities. The map features multiple terrains and areas like forests, swamps, and industrial ruins haunted by hostile anomalies. The player needs to defend themselves using firearms and other tools which need to be scavenged and maintained to increase their chances of survival. The game is slow-paced but the addition of high-intensity encounters and jump scare makes it earn its spot in the horror and thriller genre.

## The Dystopian Atmosphere

The game uses shaders to enable realistic lighting and shadows along with high-resolution textures which add to the realism of the game. While being dangerous, the environment delivers some of the most surreal visual experiences using particles and skyboxes. The sceneries that the player can experience in this dystopian world are breathtaking.

The sound design is also core to the eerie atmosphere and builds on the horror. Howling winds, creaking doors and ladders, sudden gunshots, and creeping footsteps are some of the more noticeable sounds that bring the dystopian world to life. In addition to the appearance of the hostile anomalies, some mobs are designed to say creepy voice lines which could catch players off guard as they are being approached by the hostile.

## Interactions in the Virtual World 

Like many other VR games, Into the radius lets the player interact with most of the dynamic objects like doors, flashlights, canned food, etc. but one of the key highlights of the game is the type and importance of these interactions which create very immersive experiences. 

As in any survival game, the player’s health/nutrition is an essential variable to the survivability and in this game, unlike games where consuming food can be performed with a click, the player needs to open the can of food and use a knife to perform the right series of action that one would do to eat food in real life. For healing oneself, the player needs to grab the health stim and inject it onto themselves as one would in real life. Although the action and physics of such tasks are simplified, it doesn’t take away from the essence of realism. 

## Realistic Weapon Mechanics 

One of the key features of the game includes realistic firearm mechanics like reloading your handgun. In traditional shooter games, pressing ‘R’ has been the norm to reload a weapon but in “into the radius”, the user needs to make sure that the magazines are manually loaded using the ammunition box, and reloading the weapon requires the user to unload the empty magazine, the grab the correct type of magazine and manually insert the magazine before attempting to use the gun. This idea sounds not as bad but in the heat of the moment during those high-intensity encounters with hostile anomalies, even a single mistake could risk your survival.


Additionally, the players need to pay attention to some more details while using firearms.

- Make sure safety is switched off.
- Bullet Ricochets can inflict damage on the player.
- Bullets can penetrate through certain surfaces, so players aren’t always  - safe when taking cover
- Weapon Maintenance is essential to prevent the firearm from getting jammed, especially when you need it the most

## BETTER in VR 

It’s a given that VR controllers provide an extra dimensionality to input schemes for and VR game. And what better game than a survival game to utilize 3D input where the player must perform realistic actions even in the virtual world? While still possible, using a controller or a mouse would significantly take away from the gameplay experience, and additionally increases the complexity of the input. Sometimes games like this can be difficult to understand for new players, especially when it comes to all the various key binding that they need to remember. Using VR for this game, the player is instead required to perform actions with their controllers to complete certain tasks which come very naturally and are easier to remember. For example, pressing F for the flashlight compared to reaching for your flashlight that’s holstered on your utility belt. So, instead of learning a lot of new key bindings and series of key combinations, the knowledge to perform a certain task in the real world can be used as well to perform the same tasks in the virtual world.

For a non-VR first-person shooter game, the player needs to aim where they look or look where they aim. The emphasis here is on the fact that due to the lack of input the player is bounded to look where they aim. Over the years, this mechanic has been dominant, and players have adapted to it but it’s obvious that if given the option, the ability to have individual control on look and aim provides much more gameplay-related opportunities for the players and makes it feel natural. With VR headsets and controllers, each being a source of independent input makes it possible for the player to, for example, peak around a corner without having to aim the firearm or check the surroundings while maintaining the firearm’s direction.

Since the goal of this game or many other survivals game is to simply survive for as long as you can, the game can just be called an interactive experience. The use of VR enables the developer to truly create an experience where the virtual world feels realistic. For any such first-person shooter video game, VR allows the players to feel like they are in fact in the game.

## Target Audience Analysis

The target audience for this game as mentioned by the game developers is VR veterans. It is understandable since VR can create a level of immersion that for some people feels too real especially new VR headset owners. Knowing the genre of the game as horror would certainly make newcomers not want to play the game. Unless one enjoys the thrill and excitement from all things horror in which case, this game would be one of the best games out there for you. 

In terms of maturity rating, the game is supposed to be for teens and above due to the element of violence, adding the horror and VR elements could easily bump it up to mature. Additionally, the hostile entities and the player both are designed to avoid any sort of blood and gore from getting wounded which would make one think that the game developers wanted to accommodate a wider player base. The game has a lot of emphasis on the realism of gun mechanics and physics, so it would be right to say that players who desire such experience the gunplay are also part of the target audience.

# Critiquing the Flaws 



- One of the issues that can branch from the limitations of VR technology is that some tasks might require more precise control to work as expected. This could be seen as something that can be solved with the development of more precise and accurate sensors for controllers in the future or perhaps changes in the game to compensate for the lack of precise control.
- The game’s base difficulty can be frustrating and could “tilt” players. As mentioned by a lot of reviewers, the game’s difficulty doesn’t accommodate new players.
- Since the environment demands a lot of processing power for consistent framerates, one of the optimization techniques used was to design the in-game objects with low-poly models which does work against the realism that the game is trying to achieve.
- Even though the map has different areas and biomes, the overall lighting of the game remains a little under-saturated and dull to achieve a certain dystopian theme, but this ends up making the gameplay feel dull as well when players spend hours exploring the world.
- Horror and Thriller usually means jump scares, entities sneaking up, and other interactions which could lead to users’ reflexes hurting them or anyone around them. This could be said for any other VR titles in general, but the chances of this happening are even more in horror titles.
- The thrill factor that’s core to the experience in this dystopian world might go down with time once you get used to the world.
- This game is usually compared to other non-VR games with similar game settings and environments and compared to those the combat and hostile mechanics might seem a little bland.


